ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

# Architecture Guide

This document explains the high-level design of Pongo, how the pieces fit together, and provides links to the code for deep dives.

## System Overview

Pongo is a real-time multiplayer game built on a shared-code architecture. The core game logic is written in Rust and compiled to WebAssembly (WASM) for both the client (browser) and server (Cloudflare Durable Objects).

### High-Level Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD
    Client["Client (Browser)"] <-->|WebSocket Binary| Server["Cloudflare Worker"]
    
    subgraph "Server (Durable Object)"
        ServerLoop["Game Loop (60Hz)"]
        ServerState["Authoritative State"]
    end
    
    subgraph "Client (WASM)"
        Input["Input Handling"] --> Predict["Prediction System"]
        Predict --> Render["WebGPU Renderer"]
        ServerState -.->|Snapshot| Reconcile["Reconciliation"]
    end
    
    ServerLoop -- Broadcast 20Hz --> Client
    Client -- Input --> ServerLoop
```

## Codebase Map

The project is structured as a Cargo workspace with shared crates.

| Crate | Path | Description | Key Files |
|-------|------|-------------|-----------|
| **game_core** | [`game_core/`](game_core/) | **The Heart.** Shared ECS logic, physics, and config. | [`lib.rs`](game_core/src/lib.rs) (step function)<br>[`config.rs`](game_core/src/config.rs) (constants) |
| **client_wasm** | [`client_wasm/`](client_wasm/) | **The Frontend.** Prediction, interpolation, and rendering. | [`lib.rs`](client_wasm/src/lib.rs) (entry)<br>[`renderer/`](client_wasm/src/renderer) (WebGPU) |
| **server_do** | [`server_do/`](server_do/) | **The Backend.** Durable Object implementation. | [`game_state.rs`](server_do/src/game_state.rs) (server logic) |
| **proto** | [`proto/`](proto/) | **The Glue.** Network messages and serialization. | [`lib.rs`](proto/src/lib.rs) (structs) |

---

## How It Works

### 1. The Game Loop (`game_core`)

The simulation is deterministic and frame-independent. It uses a fixed timestep (60Hz) with an accumulator to ensure physics consistency across different frame rates.

- **Entry Point:** [`step`](game_core/src/lib.rs#L19)
- **Physics:** [`systems/movement.rs`](game_core/src/systems/movement.rs) handles movement, [`systems/collision.rs`](game_core/src/systems/collision.rs) handles bounces.
- **ECS:** We use [hecs](https://docs.rs/hecs) for entity management.

### 2. The Server (`server_do`)

Each game match runs in a Cloudflare **Durable Object** (DO). The DO maintains the authoritative state and runs the `step` function 60 times a second.

- **Tick Loop:** The server calls `GameState::step` which delegates to `game_core::step`.
- **Broadcasting:** Every 3rd tick (20Hz), it sends a snapshot to all clients via `broadcast_state`.

### 3. The Client (`client_wasm`)

The client needs to be smooth (120Hz+) even though headers only arrive at 20Hz.

- **Prediction:** The [`ClientPredictor`](client_wasm/src/prediction.rs) applies local inputs immediately so the player feels zero latency.
- **Reconciliation:** When a server snapshot arrives, if it disagrees with the local prediction significantly, the client resets to the authoritative server state.
- **Rendering:** [`Renderer`](client_wasm/src/renderer/mod.rs) uses WebGPU to draw the state. It interpolates remote entities (opponent paddle, ball) for smoothness.

### 4. Networking (`proto`)

We use [postcard](https://github.com/jamesmunns/postcard) for efficient binary serialization over WebSockets.

- **C2S (Client to Server):** Input, Join, Ping.
- **S2C (Server to Client):** GameState, Welcome, GameOver.
- **Definitions:** See [`proto/src/lib.rs`](proto/src/lib.rs).

### 5. Game States (Client FSM)

The client uses a Finite State Machine to manage the flow between menus, matchmaking, and gameplay.

```mermaid
graph TD
    IDLE -->|START_LOCAL| COUNTDOWN_LOCAL
    IDLE -->|CREATE/JOIN| CONNECTING

    COUNTDOWN_LOCAL -->|DONE| PLAYING_LOCAL
    COUNTDOWN_LOCAL -->|QUIT| IDLE

    PLAYING_LOCAL -->|GAME_OVER| GAME_OVER_LOCAL
    PLAYING_LOCAL -->|QUIT| IDLE

    GAME_OVER_LOCAL -->|PLAY_AGAIN| COUNTDOWN_LOCAL
    GAME_OVER_LOCAL -->|LEAVE| IDLE

    CONNECTING -->|CONNECTED| WAITING
    CONNECTING -->|FAILED| IDLE

    WAITING -->|JOINED| COUNTDOWN_MULTI
    WAITING -->|DISCONNECT/LEAVE| IDLE

    COUNTDOWN_MULTI -->|DONE| PLAYING_MULTI
    COUNTDOWN_MULTI -->|DISCONNECT| DISCONNECTED

    PLAYING_MULTI -->|GAME_OVER| GAME_OVER_MULTI
    PLAYING_MULTI -->|DISCONNECT| DISCONNECTED

    GAME_OVER_MULTI -->|REMATCH| COUNTDOWN_MULTI
    GAME_OVER_MULTI -->|LEAVE| IDLE
    GAME_OVER_MULTI -->|DISCONNECT| DISCONNECTED

    DISCONNECTED -->|LEAVE| IDLE

    style IDLE fill:#f9f,stroke:#333
    style CONNECTING fill:#bbf,stroke:#333
    style DISCONNECTED fill:#ff9999,stroke:#333
```

---

## Key Data Flows

### Input Handling
1. Browser captures key press in [`on_key_down`](client_wasm/src/lib.rs).
2. Client updates local paddle immediately.
3. Client sends `C2S::Input` to server.
4. Server applies input in its next tick.
5. Server includes new paddle position in next broadcast.

### Rendering Frame
1. `requestAnimationFrame` calls [`render`](client_wasm/src/lib.rs).
2. Prediction system updates local game state.
3. [`Renderer::draw`](client_wasm/src/renderer/mod.rs) submits draw commands to GPU.

---

## Technical Reference

### Game Constants

| Constant | Value | Unit |
|----------|-------|------|
| Arena | 32 × 24 | units |
| Paddle | 0.8 × 4.0 | units |
| Paddle speed | 18 | units/sec |
| Ball radius | 0.5 | units |
| Ball speed | 12 → 24 | units/sec |
| Speed multiplier | 1.05× | per hit |
| Win score | 5 | points |

*Constants defined in [`game_core/src/config.rs`](game_core/src/config.rs)*

### Network Protocol

**Client → Server:**
```rust
enum C2S {
    Join { code: [u8; 5] },
    Input { player_id: u8, paddle_dir: i8, seq: u32 },
    Ping { t_ms: u32 },
}
```

**Server → Client:**
```rust
enum S2C {
    Welcome { player_id: u8 },
    GameState { tick, ball, paddles, score },
    GameOver { winner: u8 },
    Pong { t_ms: u32 },
}
```

### ECS Components & Systems

**Components:** `Paddle { player_id, y }` · `Ball { pos, vel }` · `PaddleIntent { dir }`

**Systems:** IngestInputs → MoveBall → MovePaddles → CheckCollisions → CheckScoring

### Physics

- **Walls:** Reflect Y velocity
- **Paddles:** Reflect X velocity + spin based on hit position
- **Speed:** +5% per hit, max 24 u/s

Commit message:

fix: implement server-side speed validation for paddle movement

ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

# Architecture Guide

This document explains the high-level design of Pongo, how the pieces fit together, and provides links to the code for deep dives.

## System Overview

Pongo is a real-time multiplayer game built on a shared-code architecture. The core game logic is written in Rust and compiled to WebAssembly (WASM) for both the client (browser) and server (Cloudflare Durable Objects).

### High-Level Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD
    Client["Client (Browser)"] <-->|WebSocket Binary| Server["Cloudflare Worker"]
    
    subgraph "Server (Durable Object)"
        ServerLoop["Game Loop (60Hz)"]
        ServerState["Authoritative State"]
    end
    
    subgraph "Client (WASM)"
        Input["Input Handling"] --> Predict["Prediction System"]
        Predict --> Render["WebGPU Renderer"]
        ServerState -.->|Snapshot| Reconcile["Reconciliation"]
    end
    
    ServerLoop -- Broadcast 20Hz --> Client
    Client -- Input --> ServerLoop
```

## Codebase Map

The project is structured as a Cargo workspace with shared crates.

| Crate | Path | Description | Key Files |
|-------|------|-------------|-----------|
| **game_core** | [`game_core/`](game_core/) | **The Heart.** Shared ECS logic, physics, and config. | [`lib.rs`](game_core/src/lib.rs) (step function)<br>[`config.rs`](game_core/src/config.rs) (constants) |
| **client_wasm** | [`client_wasm/`](client_wasm/) | **The Frontend.** Prediction, interpolation, and rendering. | [`lib.rs`](client_wasm/src/lib.rs) (entry)<br>[`renderer/`](client_wasm/src/renderer) (WebGPU) |
| **server_do** | [`server_do/`](server_do/) | **The Backend.** Durable Object implementation. | [`game_state.rs`](server_do/src/game_state.rs) (server logic) |
| **proto** | [`proto/`](proto/) | **The Glue.** Network messages and serialization. | [`lib.rs`](proto/src/lib.rs) (structs) |

---

## How It Works

### 1. The Game Loop (`game_core`)

The simulation is deterministic and frame-independent. It uses a fixed timestep (60Hz) with an accumulator to ensure physics consistency across different frame rates.

- **Entry Point:** [`step`](game_core/src/lib.rs#L19)
- **Physics:** [`systems/movement.rs`](game_core/src/systems/movement.rs) handles movement, [`systems/collision.rs`](game_core/src/systems/collision.rs) handles bounces.
- **ECS:** We use [hecs](https://docs.rs/hecs) for entity management.

### 2. The Server (`server_do`)

Each game match runs in a Cloudflare **Durable Object** (DO). The DO maintains the authoritative state and runs the `step` function 60 times a second.

- **Tick Loop:** The server calls `GameState::step` which delegates to `game_core::step`.
- **Broadcasting:** Every 3rd tick (20Hz), it sends a snapshot to all clients via `broadcast_state`.

> [!NOTE]
> **Edge Latency Nuance:** While Durable Objects run "at the edge," each specific match runs in a **single location**. Frame updates still suffer light-speed latency for players far from that specific data center. Global latency is mitigated by region-aware matchmaking, ensuring players match in a DO close to both of them.

### 3. The Client (`client_wasm`)

The client needs to be smooth (120Hz+) even though headers only arrive at 20Hz.

- **Prediction:** The [`ClientPredictor`](client_wasm/src/prediction.rs) applies local inputs immediately so the player feels zero latency.
- **Reconciliation:** When a server snapshot arrives, if it disagrees with the local prediction significantly, the client resets to the authoritative server state.
- **Rendering:** [`Renderer`](client_wasm/src/renderer/mod.rs) uses WebGPU to draw the state. It interpolates remote entities (opponent paddle, ball) for smoothness.

### 4. Networking (`proto`)

We use [postcard](https://github.com/jamesmunns/postcard) for efficient binary serialization over WebSockets.

- **C2S (Client to Server):** Input, Join, Ping.
- **S2C (Server to Client):** GameState, Welcome, GameOver.
- **Definitions:** See [`proto/src/lib.rs`](proto/src/lib.rs).

### 5. Game States (Client FSM)

The client uses a Finite State Machine to manage the flow between menus, matchmaking, and gameplay.

```mermaid
graph TD
    IDLE -->|START_LOCAL| COUNTDOWN_LOCAL
    IDLE -->|CREATE/JOIN| CONNECTING

    COUNTDOWN_LOCAL -->|DONE| PLAYING_LOCAL
    COUNTDOWN_LOCAL -->|QUIT| IDLE

    PLAYING_LOCAL -->|GAME_OVER| GAME_OVER_LOCAL
    PLAYING_LOCAL -->|QUIT| IDLE

    GAME_OVER_LOCAL -->|PLAY_AGAIN| COUNTDOWN_LOCAL
    GAME_OVER_LOCAL -->|LEAVE| IDLE

    CONNECTING -->|CONNECTED| WAITING
    CONNECTING -->|FAILED| IDLE

    WAITING -->|JOINED| COUNTDOWN_MULTI
    WAITING -->|DISCONNECT/LEAVE| IDLE

    COUNTDOWN_MULTI -->|DONE| PLAYING_MULTI
    COUNTDOWN_MULTI -->|DISCONNECT| DISCONNECTED

    PLAYING_MULTI -->|GAME_OVER| GAME_OVER_MULTI
    PLAYING_MULTI -->|DISCONNECT| DISCONNECTED

    GAME_OVER_MULTI -->|REMATCH| COUNTDOWN_MULTI
    GAME_OVER_MULTI -->|LEAVE| IDLE
    GAME_OVER_MULTI -->|DISCONNECT| DISCONNECTED

    DISCONNECTED -->|LEAVE| IDLE

    style IDLE fill:#f9f,stroke:#333
    style CONNECTING fill:#bbf,stroke:#333
    style DISCONNECTED fill:#ff9999,stroke:#333
```

---

## Key Data Flows

### Input Handling
1. Browser captures key press in [`on_key_down`](client_wasm/src/lib.rs).
2. Client updates local paddle immediately.
3. Client sends `C2S::Input` to server.
4. Server validates input (enforcing speed limits) and updates entity intent.
5. Server includes new paddle position in next broadcast.

### Rendering Frame
1. `requestAnimationFrame` calls [`render`](client_wasm/src/lib.rs).
2. Prediction system updates local game state.
3. [`Renderer::draw`](client_wasm/src/renderer/mod.rs) submits draw commands to GPU.

---

## Technical Reference

### Game Constants

| Constant | Value | Unit |
|----------|-------|------|
| Arena | 32 × 24 | units |
| Paddle | 0.8 × 4.0 | units |
| Paddle speed | 18 | units/sec |
| Ball radius | 0.5 | units |
| Ball speed | 12 → 24 | units/sec |
| Speed multiplier | 1.05× | per hit |
| Win score | 5 | points |

*Constants defined in [`game_core/src/config.rs`](game_core/src/config.rs)*

### Network Protocol

**Client → Server:**
```rust
enum C2S {
    Join { code: [u8; 5] },
    Input { player_id: u8, y: f32, seq: u32 },
    Ping { t_ms: u32 },
}
```

**Server → Client:**
```rust
enum S2C {
    Welcome { player_id: u8 },
    GameState { tick, ball, paddles, score },
    GameOver { winner: u8 },
    Pong { t_ms: u32 },
}
```

### ECS Components & Systems

**Components:** `Paddle { player_id, y }` · `Ball { pos, vel }` · `PaddleIntent { dir }`

**Systems:** IngestInputs → MoveBall → MovePaddles → CheckCollisions → CheckScoring

### Physics

- **Walls:** Reflect Y velocity
- **Paddles:** Reflect X velocity + spin based on hit position
- **Speed:** +5% per hit, max 24 u/s
